AsksinPP_developments/addons/hb-ep-devices-addon/CCU_RM/AsksinPP_addon_files_generator/README.md, before:

 
# Groovy generator script [AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy](./AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy) for automatically generate device specific install and uninstall scripts [![License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC--SA%204.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/) [![Hits](https://hits.seeyoufarm.com/api/count/incr/badge.svg?url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FFUEL4EP%2FHomeAutomation%2Ftree%2Fmaster%2FAsksinPP_developments%2Faddons%2Fhb-ep-devices-addon%2FCCU_RM%2FAsksinPP_addon_files_generator&count_bg=%2379C83D&title_bg=%23555555&icon=&icon_colorfile:///usr/share/applications/ghostwriter.desktop=%23E7E7E7&title=hits&edge_flat=false)](https://hits.seeyoufarm.com)


# Since this generator software has beta status only, please check the generated install and uninstall scripts carefully before using them in a production version of an addon.

 

- Creates install and uninstall scripts required in [../src/addon/](../src/addon/)

- The following software installations are prereqisites:

	+ install [groovy](https://groovy-lang.org/), a multi-faceted language for the Java platform, on your computer
	+ install [XML Copy Editor](https://xml-copy-editor.sourceforge.io/) on your computer
	+ both groovy and XML Copy Editor are free software and available for Windows, Mac, and Linux. Please choose an appropriate source for these software based on your system setup.
- Please follow the following steps to create the addon install and uninstall scripts
	+ create if not yet exists a new working directory '[_work](./_work)' 
	+ create if not yet exists a subdirectory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)' for your device for which you want to generate the addon install and uninstall scripts
	+ copy the [example XML control](_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml) file to this working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ copy the [XML Schema file](_work/AsksinPP_addon_control_file.xsd) file to this working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ copy the [example XML control](_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml) in your new device's working directory to your new sensors XML control file <e.g. HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml>. File extension needs to be '.xml'.
	+ change to your working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ edit your new sensors XML control file <e.g. HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml> with the XML Copy Editor.
	+ you should get [this](./Images/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml.png) xmlcopyeditor window.
	+ now edit in XML Copy Editor the XML elements according to your needs:
		* add or delete data_points according to your new device's needs
		* the element channel_type can be chosen arbitrarily for each datapoint. If you want to skip it, enter 'SKIP'. It should match the channel type of the datapoint in the concerning rftypes XML file.
		* the element device_description is automatically HTML4 encoded by the generator script, so no need to take care e.g. of Umlauts here
		* the elements translated_string are automatically URL encoded by the generator script, so no need to take care e.g. of Umlauts here
		* after having done all changes, please check your XML:
			- click on the blue checkmark of the XML copy menu to check whether your XML is well-formed
			- click on the green checkmark of the XML copy menu to check whether your XML is valid. If it is valid (see message at the bottom) save it.
			
- now invoke the groovy generator script in a terminal window as follows:
> 		groovy <path_to_groovy_script>/AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy
- next you will be asked for the file name of the generated XML control file, please enter it e.g. <HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml> .
- the generator script will create an install and an uninstall script in the working directory
- check the created install and an uninstall script before you yuse it within an AsksinPP addon
- a [make_all.bsh](./make_all.bsh) bash script is provided for reference. Please adapt it to your needs.


## Lizenz

**Creative Commons BY-NC-SA**<br>
Give Credit, NonCommercial, ShareAlike

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.

Commit message:

hb-ep-devices-addon: added early version of rftypes XML extractor 'extract_rftypes_XML.groovy'

AsksinPP_developments/addons/hb-ep-devices-addon/CCU_RM/AsksinPP_addon_files_generator/README.md, after:

 
# Groovy generator script [AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy](./AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy) for automatically generate device specific install and uninstall scripts [![License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC--SA%204.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/) [![Hits](https://hits.seeyoufarm.com/api/count/incr/badge.svg?url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FFUEL4EP%2FHomeAutomation%2Ftree%2Fmaster%2FAsksinPP_developments%2Faddons%2Fhb-ep-devices-addon%2FCCU_RM%2FAsksinPP_addon_files_generator&count_bg=%2379C83D&title_bg=%23555555&icon=&icon_colorfile:///usr/share/applications/ghostwriter.desktop=%23E7E7E7&title=hits&edge_flat=false)](https://hits.seeyoufarm.com)

<br/>
## IMPORTANT: Since this generator software has beta status only, please check the generated install and uninstall scripts carefully before using them in a production version of an addon. In particular, the webuiInsert section may be incomplete, e.g. if the device needs specific DEV_HIGHLIGHT entries like ''hb-ou-mp3-led'. Please handle those entries manually. Thanks.
<br/>

 

- Creates install and uninstall scripts required in [../src/addon/](../src/addon/)

- The following software installations are prereqisites:

	+ install [groovy](https://groovy-lang.org/), a multi-faceted language for the Java platform, on your computer
	+ install [XML Copy Editor](https://xml-copy-editor.sourceforge.io/) on your computer
	+ both groovy and XML Copy Editor are free software and available for Windows, Mac, and Linux. Please choose an appropriate source for these software based on your system setup.
- Please follow the following steps to create the addon install and uninstall scripts
	+ create if not yet exists a new working directory '[_work](./_work)' 
	+ create if not yet exists a subdirectory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)' for your device for which you want to generate the addon install and uninstall scripts
	+ copy the [example XML control](_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml) file to this working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ copy the [XML Schema file](_work/AsksinPP_addon_control_file.xsd) file to this working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ copy the [example XML control](_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml) in your new device's working directory to your new sensors XML control file <e.g. HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml>. File extension needs to be '.xml'.
	+ change to your working directory '[<Device_name: here HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE>](./_work/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE)
	+ edit your new sensors XML control file <e.g. HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml> with the XML Copy Editor.
	+ you should get [this](./Images/HB-UNI-Sensor-EXAMPLE_addon_control.xml.png) xmlcopyeditor window.
	+ now edit in XML Copy Editor the XML elements according to your needs:
		* add or delete data_points according to your new device's needs
		* the element channel_type can be chosen arbitrarily for each datapoint. If you want to skip it, enter 'SKIP'. It should match the channel type of the datapoint in the concerning rftypes XML file.
		* the element device_description is automatically HTML4 encoded by the generator script, so no need to take care e.g. of Umlauts here
		* the elements translated_string are automatically URL encoded by the generator script, so no need to take care e.g. of Umlauts here
		* after having done all changes, please check your XML:
			- click on the blue checkmark of the XML copy menu to check whether your XML is well-formed
			- click on the green checkmark of the XML copy menu to check whether your XML is valid. If it is valid (see message at the bottom) save it.
			
- now invoke the groovy generator script in a terminal window as follows:
> 		groovy <path_to_groovy_script>/AsksinPP_addon_generator.groovy
- next you will be asked for the file name of the generated XML control file, please enter it e.g. <HB-UNI-Sensor-XXX-YYYY_addon_control.xml> .
- the generator script will create an install and an uninstall script in the working directory
- check the created install and an uninstall script before you yuse it within an AsksinPP addon
- a [make_all.bsh](./make_all.bsh) bash script is provided for reference. Please adapt it to your needs.
- An early version of a rfytpes XML extractor is provided [extract_rftypes_XML.groovy](./extract_rftypes_XML.groovy). Feedback is welcome.


## Lizenz

**Creative Commons BY-NC-SA**<br>
Give Credit, NonCommercial, ShareAlike

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.
